RIDDLE 1 :THE PRISONER AND HAT RIDDLE (TWO HATS)


You and other individuals have been captured by super-intelligent alien overlords. The aliens think humans look quite tasty, but their civilization forbids eating highly logical and cooperative beings. Unfortunately, they’re not sure whether you qualify, so they decide to give you all a test. 
The aliens tell you the following: 

"You will be placed in a line, facing forward and ordered from tallest to shortest. You will not be able to look behind you or step out of line. Each of you will have either a blue or a red hat, assigned randomly and I won't tell how many of each colour there are. When I say to begnin, each of you must guess the colour of your hat, starting from the person in the back and moving down the line. Don't even think to say words other than 'red' or 'blue' or signal something with intonation for example: You will be all eaten immediately! If at least the total number of you -1 guess the hat correctly, you will be spared. You have 5 minutes to discuss a strategy and then we begin!"

Can you think of a strategy guaranteed to save everyone? 



RIDDLE 2: THE PRISONER AND HAT RIDDLE (THREE HATS)


In this riddle you are playing to get as much money as possible! In this game, you and other people have to guess correctly the colour of your own hat. Compared to before, there are now three hats (blue, red or yellow). As expected, each contestant can see the colors of the hats of everyone in front of her but does not know the color of her own hat or that of anyone behind.

During the game, you are lined up single-file. The host, starting from the back of the line, asks each contestant to state aloud the color of her hat. The contestants are not permitted to say anything other than a color (blue, red or yellow), and they can only speak once. (All of the contestants hear what each of the others says aloud.) The host then goes to the next contestant and repeats the question, continuing until all contestants have spoken. At the end, if there are x correct answers, a purse of x times $10,000 is distributed equally among all players. 

What strategy maximizes the amount the contestants win? And what is the expected amount?



When you give up, or if you just want to know whether you are correct or not, you can analyse one of the two riddles by using this programme. For a discussion of the strategy used in each riddle read our report! :)

